In this video, I will attempt to create my own LLM from scratch, no fine tuning, nothing,
just completely from my own data, and for a creative twist, I will try to make it only speak
pirate language. Personally, I've been wanting to build my own LLM for a while. However,
I always thought that it would be a super expensive and a huge project, but the entire project at the
end just costed me around 70 cents of GPU costs and about three days of work. I have nothing to
sell, I just wanted to share the process and hopefully inspire others to build it themselves,
and to really make this a learning project, I refrained from overusing LLM for the code.
I was allowed to copy paste, but no coding harness like codecs or cloud code. This is to hopefully
understand the deeper. So let's begin day one. Before going into this project, I spent some time
studying deeper how LLMs are made using cloud. My goal was mostly to get an overview and fill in the
gaps that I might have. Since I kind of knew already how LLMs worked, just because I studied AI,
however, we really never went deep into the exact architecture and training methodologies of
modern LLMs. So after about one hour or so of studying, I got a rough understanding of the steps
we need to follow to make this work. The first thing we have to do is build our vocabulary through
tokenization. For simplicity, you can think of it as just simply assigning a number to a specific word.
Therefore, being able to translate text into something numerical, which you know, like an LLM
could actually learn from. What's important is that after tokenization, we never change the vocabulary
or else the entire model needs to retrain. This becomes the input of the neural network.
What the neural network like the actual architecture actually does is try to predict the
probability of each token given what came before. Then based on this model, we would basically tune
it on instructions. This is to hopefully teach it to have normal conversations. And this is usually
done with a lot smaller learning rate and a far smaller subset of data to hopefully not disturb
the base model all too much. And that is actually kind of it, you know, you first build a dictionary,
then based on the dictionary and your training data, you basically build the model. And then
you just add a final layer of instruction tuning on top to make it behave like a chatbot and not
like an auto complete. So yeah, now that we roughly have an idea of what we have to do, we can now start
the actual project in day two. Day two. I began the day with researching some data sets that I could
use for this project. And basically, I came up with two main ways. Either I somehow find enough
text which is already in pirate language or I train the model in just normal English and then
try to instruct tune it to only speak in pirate language. But I really wanted to try the first
option. So I went to see if there are already some data sets that I could use. However, while doing
so I found this library called R in Python which turns text into pirate language using, you know,
like a rule based system. So I wanted to try it out immediately. However, I noticed that putting this
on top of an already trained LLM would have basically done what I wanted to do in the first place.
Nevertheless, I still just continued my work on my LLM as it's just mostly proving myself that I
can do it. And also in the last video I talked about ticking off the engineer bucket lists and I guess
in a way creating your LLM maybe also is part of, you know, ticking off that bucket list.
Now I found this data set called Tiny Stories which includes around two million small stories
in English. I then took the Python library R and basically translated or augmented the
tiny stories data set into pirate speak. After that it was time to create our dictionary of tokens.
For that I used BPE and the hugging phase tokenizer library to basically create our dictionary
of 8,000 tokens. Okay, so I'm currently creating the tokenizer. It's actually really, really,
really quick and simple. I didn't expect it to be like that. But all I did was I imported tokenizer.
This is like a hugging phase library and I imported BPE as the model for tokenizing and yeah.
And then I just did this in batches and I saved it. So now we can actually look at our pirate BPE Jason
and see what we have. Okay, so here are as you can see the codes for every, you know,
like this is basically the token for end for text and this is the token for the exclamation mark and
all of that. And this just then goes over and gives basically one token per, you know, per,
I guess word. There's some words here which are I guess a bit weird. I don't know. Let's try to find
a hoi. Okay, there are, this is a hoi, I guess. I don't know why there's a gene in front.
I guess this has to do with the tokenizer that we used. But yeah, very interesting.
Once we completed our dictionary, we would then have to basically augment the tiny stories
data set with our dictionary to tokenize it so that all of the tiny stories would basically be then,
you know, just numbers which we can then, you know, input in a sequence for our LLM. Out of this,
we got around 500 million tokens in our data set which would be hopefully enough to train our model.
I then saved it in bin files for optimization and then we went to the actual training part.
Since I'm running this on an M1 MacBook, I can only use really MPS or CPU but not really GPU for
training. However, that's no problem. I mean for now, it's just good enough for debugging but I
would then just basically have to run the entire training loop on a rented server with a GPU
in a bit. The model itself mimics very closely the GPT architecture. So we start with the sentence.
Let's say the cat set and this we then first tokenize it like we said. So let's say this is token
1, this is 2 and this is 3 and basically our neural network actually has a specific dimensionality.
Okay, so for instance here we have three numbers which is basically the numerical representation of
our sentence that we have. We can have in total in our case 256 meaning we have basically, you
can think of as a vector which basically looks like this three because we have three input tokens
and then 256. This is the dimensionality of our input vector. Based on the input that we gave,
we first actually create embeddings out of this and embeddings are basically just you can think of
as more semantic meaning into the words in this case the numbers that we have. So if you've ever
actually looked into a rag retrieval augmented generation. If you have here the word cat and the
word dog those might be more closer in vector space. So imagine these are like in a 2D plane
then maybe the word mountain. As you can see mountain is a lot further away than cat and dog.
And so basically we have to try to get this out of the input sentence the cat sat.
Right? So we basically create embeddings out of this. In our case the embeddings that we created
have a dimensionality of 364. So we now basically have you can think of in a way I mean
simplified we have here a vector if you will you know of the dimensionality that has like three
dimensions right. And the dimensionality is 356 and 364. So we're now on three dimensions already
now okay. Now the thing that we do next actually is we put this into transformer blocks
which basically try to get the positional meaning and understanding of each. So let me show you
what this means. If we have here the cat sat then basically the word the just is for itself
but the word cat you know gets the previous token and itself. And then the word sat also gets the
two previous tokens and also it gets itself. This is actually how we basically try to teach
a neural network the the meaning of a sequence itself you know. This is not just good for text as
you can see where each word actually depends on each other you know because we don't you know
there's a clear difference between the cat sat and sat the cat right. Now a neural network normally
would actually think that these two are the same but our language is actually a bit more complicated
than that and that's why we need positional understanding of you know how each word basically
interacts with each other. In our case we have six of these transformer blocks okay these are
called transformers and that is where the T and GPT comes from generative pre-trained transformers.
Now after this basically we want as an output a probability list from our dictionary. So let's say
we have the words so let's say we have something like this where this is you know like a subset of
our dictionary that we actually created before. Now what we want to do is we want to give each single
value of the dictionary a you know a probability of the chance that this is the next word so we're
trying to basically predict the next sequence of the text the cat sat on sorry the cat sat. So this
means that the output is actually a huge list in our case with about 8000 you know tokens in our
dictionary because this is how much we basically set in the beginning if you remember of how many tokens
we want in our dictionary. Now let's say this has 30% and this has maybe 1% and this has maybe
0.5% and so on and this is actually here's maybe just a quick side note this is a very special token
this means end of sentence and this basically shows the LLM when the sentence is basically done
and all of these probabilities have to add up to of course 100% you know so we basically have
a list of 8000 tokens with a probability of all of them and this is hopefully simply explained
how the GPT or in this case in our case the nano GPT based on Kaparti works to have a neural network
understand and predict language and basically once we then say okay on it has the highest
percentage so this becomes the cat sat on we then have this as the input of the whole thing
again and then we just put it through everything and then we try to predict the next word which is
maybe on a and then the next word would be matte for instance so yeah I hope this explains it
well if you didn't understand it this is my failure to explain it well enough maybe I'll make a
follow-up video to explain this in more detail if there's interest so after implementing the
architecture that I just try to explain I ended the day by just basically uploading it off camera
onto GitHub and creating a public repo and I also just quickly added functionality for checkpoints
to be saved automatically on on hugging face and also waits and biases for a bit more of explainability
while it's training and yeah after this I then basically had to go and it was a pre-productive
morning and so I got fully ready to run the GPU server once I came back at night okay so I'm
finally so I finally actually started the whole training loop and it's running now on a GPU
on best AI as you can see I SSH into it and yeah so every couple of steps it's like here every
thousand steps it actually uploads this to hugging face so that we don't hopefully lose any progress
and also I am using here waits and biases to just you know see what's happening you know
on the fly as you can see the training the the loss is going down which is good right I mean here's
for the mini batch loss and here for the loss of the entire thing as you can see here like here is
the iterations down here and here we can see it going down so this I will actually monitor and I can
also look at things like here the system you know like the GPU fan running and all of that and yeah
so I'm excited to look back soon I mean it's already 22 you know it's a bit late now but I'm looking
forward to look back you know hopefully before I go to sleep but if not maybe tomorrow in the
morning but I hope before I go to sleep actually because you know I am paying by the hour for the
GPU and I don't want to waste any money but yeah that's basically it we're running now our training
data and the training loop on our GPT model to hopefully get a good base model which we can then
you know fine tune into into our liking yeah okay so it just finished training it actually really
didn't take long at all which makes me very suspicious of how good it actually is but let's actually
try to use it and to do that I have here a sample make a target so let's try it okay so here
are the samples three samples ahoy I'm sorry be okay Lily says no I'm okay be okay yes I'm okay you
made me fall the man said I'm okay okay I guess a lot of people are okay what's the second sample
here ahoy two people were walking through the woods batting down the hatches you know it's crazy
this is actually an LLM like we really created an LLM out of like pirates speak this is actually
really crazy okay let's let's try something else let's see if it can auto complete the sentence
the capital of France is okay so it doesn't seem like it knows what the capital of France is
which makes sense I mean we just used you know like the tiny stories data sets right it is no idea
you know about geographical stuff and all that I mean maybe if we would have put in some Wikipedia
data it could have found that out but yeah we created our I guess auto complete model yeah now I'm
going to stop here for today and we'll see what we can continue tomorrow we now have a base
model and it somewhat understands English grammar and syntax however it still is a glorified auto
so the next step is basically to train the chatbot like we mentioned before on a subset of additional
data which hopefully teaches the chatbot how to interact in a conversation so to begin fine tuning
I first had to find a actual data set that would be that would have question and answer pairs or
some sort of conversation in it and I did find one on GitHub actually with about 15,000 rows of
question and answer pairs which actually like in the answers they have already pirate speak in
it I think it was called the Dali data set so I took that and I then tokenized it again with
our dictionary so that you know it's consistent with that and then I fine tuned our model again on
a GPU a rented GPU on best AI for a total of about I don't know like one hour or one and a half
hours or so and the fine tuning itself had a lot smaller of a learning rate because I didn't want
to disturb the base model all too much with this and yeah I then again saved it on hugging face
the checkpoints and then I was able to actually test it out okay so it just finished actually the
SFT just finished and we can now try it out this is the first time that I'm trying it out and I just
asked how are you doing okay I guess it's kind of answering but not the way that I thought how are
you doing your sister be watching over you she be very kind and loving yo ho ho okay I'm guessing not
exactly what I thought of is as an instruct alarm but yeah I guess this is all very much on budget
still crazy to see that that this kind of still works maybe I should talk the way it talks tell
me a story matey let's see here I have a secret the booty of the booty and the ancient booty on
okay the booty be the booty sore the mysterious booty okay I guess it really likes booties
but yeah I guess this is kind of the chatbot and now we can look into creating it into a more
nicer implementation and see what we can do there now the main implementation is here by actually
complete but I still want to take it a bit further and you know package it a bit nicer so I went on
and I proceeded to actually you know try to make a logo and a name out of it like I after going
you know here and there with some names I then stuck with the name nano beard you know it's
referencing basically black beard and for the logo some of you were complaining that I used
Gpt for the mascot of my language so instead I thought okay let me this time actually really try
to you know make this myself and I got reminded actually of a game that I used to play when I was
smaller called pixel piracy you know I don't know maybe I was like 12 years old or something like
that but it was basically like the small indie game where you actually have to command like a
troop of pirates you know and so I tried to go with a style like that where I made like a pixel art
logo of basically black beard I just tried to make black beard in pixel art and then to finish
everything off I wanted to actually put this into a hugging face space which if you don't know you
can actually host like some darker images and all of that in your own models on on hugging face
itself without having you know to create your own website and all that and that was for me just
you know like the better short term option because you can literally just rent a CPU on there
which I just did because our model is so small we don't need any GPUs to actually run it on
so I created a small environment like a chat environment for us to basically then test it out
I basically created like small chat environment with a radio to test out and basically talk with
our chatbot so yeah without further ado here's the finished product there once was a ship that put
to see and the name of the ship was the Billy of T the winds blew up her bow dipped down blow my
bully boys blow huh she had not been two weeks from shore when down on her right whale bore the captain
called all hands and swore he'd take that whale and toe soon may the wellerman come to bring a
sugar and tea and rum one day when the tongue and is done we'll take our leave and go soon may the
wellerman come to bring a sugar and tea and rum one day when the tongue and is done we'll take
our leave and go so yeah that was the end of this project I hope you enjoyed listening or or
also learn something if you're still here that should hopefully indicate that you did actually
enjoy it or I liked it or you just forgot to just close the video while you were doing something
else either way thank you if you made it this far bye